[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Any time you want to
understand something,
why is such and such happening,
why is there a biodiversity
crisis, or why are we
drilling for more oil when
it's polluting the atmosphere
and causing oil spills, why?
And you ask why?
And down a couple levels of why,
you always get to the money.
Yeah, I talk a lot
about the story of self
that every culture has.
And it answers the
question what are you?
What is it to be human?
So it says that you're
this separate being
among other separate
beings in a universe that
is separate from yourself
as well, like you're not me.
That plant is not me.
That's something separate.
And this story of self
really creates our world.
If you're a separate
self, and there's
other separate selves out there,
and other species out there,
and the universe
is fundamentally
indifferent to you
or even hostile,
then you definitely
want to control.
You want to be able to have
power over other beings
and over these whimsical,
arbitrary forces of nature that
could extinguish
you at any time.
This story is becoming obsolete.
It's becoming no longer true.
We don't resonate
with it anymore.
And it's actually
generating crises
that are insoluble from
the methods of control.
And that's what's
clearing space,
clearing the space for us to
step into a new story of self
and a new story of the people.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, money is an agreement.
It doesn't have
value all by itself.
It has value because people
agree that it has value.
Economists will tell
you what money does.
It facilitates exchange.
You use it to count things
and keep track of things.
Now, you write some numbers
on a magical piece of paper
called a check.
And you can cause all
kinds of abundant goods
to come to your house.
And you could even cause
misery for thousands of people
if you are one of
the highest initiates
of the magic of money.
Scarcity is built
into the money system.
On a most obvious level,
it's because of the way
money is created as
interest-bearing debt.
So anytime a bank lends money
into existence or the Federal
Reserve creates money,
the money comes along
with a corresponding
amount of debt.
And the debt, because
there's interest on it,
is always greater than
the amount of money.
So it essentially throws
people into competition
with each other for
never enough money.
Growth is another thing that's
built into our money system.
If you're a bank, you're going
to lend to the person who's
going to create new goods and
services so they can profit
and they can pay you back.
You're not going to lend
to somebody who doesn't
create goods and services.
So money goes toward those who
will create even more of it.
But, basically,
economic growth means
that you have to find
something that was once nature
and make it into a good.
Or it was once a
gift relationship
and make it into a service.
You have to find something
that people once got for free
or did for themselves
or for each other
and then take it away and
sell it back to them somehow.
By turning things
into commodities,
we get cut off from
nature in the same way
as we're cut off from community.
We look at nature with eyes
of it's just a bunch of stuff.
And that leaves us very
lonely and leaves us
with many basic human
needs that go unmet.
And if you have
money, you might try
to fill this hunger
through purchasing,
through buying things, or
through accumulating money
itself.
And of course, now we're
nearing the end of growth.
The planet can't sustain
much more growth.
And that's why the crisis that
we have today won't go away.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the things I talk about
is the sense of wrongness
that I had as a child.
I think most kids
have some sense of it
that it's not supposed to be
this way, just for example,
that you're not supposed
to actually hate Monday
and be happy when you
don't have to go to school,
like school should be
something that you love.
Life should be
We didn't earn any of the
things that really keep us alive
or that make life good.
We didn't earn air.
We didn't earn being born.
We didn't earn our conception.
We didn't earn being
able to breathe.
We didn't earn having a
planet that can provide food.
We didn't earn the sun.
So I think that on
some level, people
have this inborn gratitude.
Because on some
level, we know that we
didn't earn any of this.
We know that life is a gift.
Well, if you know that
you've received a gift,
then the natural response
is gratitude, the desire
to give in turn.
In a gift economy,
it's not true the way
it is in our money economy
that everybody's in competition
with everybody else.
In a gift society, if you
have more than you need,
you give it to
somebody who needs it.
That's how you get status.
And that's even where
security comes from.
Because if you build
up all that gratitude,
then people are going
to take care of you too.
And if there are no gifts,
then there's no community.
And we can see as society's
become more monetized
that communities disappear.
People long for it.
But you can't just have
community as an add-on
to a monetized life.
You have to actually
need each other.
People desire to
enact their gifts.
And if they were free from
money, they would do it.
But money is so often a barrier.
People think, oh,
I'd love to do this.
But can I afford to do it?
Is it practical?
Money stops them.
What beautiful thing
what would I do?
What am I called to do?
Would it be to set up big
gardens for homeless people
to take care of and
reconnect them to nature?
Would it be to clean
up a toxic waste site?
Like what would you do?
What beautiful
thing would you do?
And why isn't it practical
to do these things?
Why isn't there money
in those things?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
An economy that embodies
the principles of the gift
is an economy that is simply
grounded in the truth.
The task before us
is to align money
with the true
expression of our gifts.
It requires a very
different mechanism
for the creation of money
and the circulation of money.
They include things like
negative interest, which
reverses the effects of usury.
They include things like
the internalization of costs
so that you can
no longer pollute
and have somebody else or future
generations pay the costs.
They include a social
dividend, sharing
in the wealth that
comes from what
should be the commons,
the land, the aquifers,
our cultural heritage.
They include a relocalization
of a lot of economic functions.
They include all kinds
of peer-to-peer financing
and the peer-to-peer revolution.
What will it take to shift away
from the current money system?
Well, the current money system
just works less and less well.
Growth can only be maintained
at a higher and higher cost.
Even our best efforts
can't keep the economy
growing as fast as it needs
to for the system to work.
And that creates further misery.
People just can't
take it anymore.
Even the people on
top, even the winners
of this artificially-induced
competition,
they're not happy either.
It's not working
for them either.
So I think that we're going to
see a series of crisis moments,
each one more severe
than the last.
And at each crisis moment,
we'll have a collective choice.
Do we give up the game
and join the people?
Or do we hold on even tighter?
It's really up to us to
determine at what point
this wake up point will happen.
Was this all a big mistake?
That's a good question.
And it sure seems like it was
sometimes when you look around
at just the hoarders that
have taken place on this Earth
and that are ongoing right now.
And some people think, I just
don't want any part of this.
Civilization was a huge mistake.
I came to see this whole journey
of separation not as a mistake,
but as part of a larger process.
It started, I think, with
the environmental movement
in the 1960s.
That was its first awakening
into mass consciousness.
And the astronauts
went up and experienced
the pinnacle of separation.
And the photos that got beamed
down, even today, it still
evokes love in us.
So we're falling
in love with Earth.
That's one part of our
transition into adulthood.
The other part is the
coming of age ordeal
when the old world falls
apart and a new world is born.
A child plays.
A child plays and
develops his or her gifts
but doesn't apply them toward
their true purpose yet.
And that's what humanity
has been doing, playing
with our gifts of
technology and culture
and developing these gifts.
Now we're coming into adulthood.
And it's time to apply
them to our true purpose.
At the beginning, I think
that'll be simply heal
the damage that's been done.
There's a lot of healing
that needs to be done.
And it's almost
impossible actually.
You could say
that, really, we're
in the business of creating
a miracle here on Earth.
I'm saying it's
something that is
impossible from an old
understanding of reality
but possible from a new one.
And in fact, it's necessary.
And, in fact, anything less than
that isn't even worth trying.
[MUSIC PLAYING]